README.md, before:

# Ö

Ö is a programming language with a weird-ish syntax.

    <Akuli>      i like how 'ding = (dang dong)' translates to 'ding = dang(dong)',
                 just move the ( to the right side of the function name
    <Zaab1t>     haha
    <Zaab1t>     syntax is odd yeah

## Hello World!

Install `make`, a C compiler and `git`. For example, if you're using a
Debian-based Linux distribution like Ubuntu or Mint, run this command:

    $ sudo apt install gcc make git

Then download and compile the interpreter.

    $ git clone https://github.com/akuli/odotdot
    $ cd odotdot
    $ make ö

You should get lots of output, but no errors.

Save this code to `hello.ö`...

```js
var msg = "Hellö Wörld!";
print msg;
```

...and run it:

    $ ./ö hello.ö
    Hellö Wörld!

See [the tutorial](docs/tutorial.md) for more. There's also
[an examples directory](examples/) and [more documentation](docs/).

## FAQ

### How do I type ö?

With the ö key. It's right next to the ä key.

### Why did you name the programming language Ö?

Ö is used quite often in Finnish, and people who aren't used to it think that
it looks like a face with mouth fully opened.

    <Zaab1t>       looks like someone scared
    <Zaab1t>       ö

See also David Beazley's [Meẗal](https://github.com/dabeaz/me-al).

### Why is the repository named odotdot instead of ö?

Because github.

## Tests

Some of the tests are written in C and some tests are written in Ö.
`runtests` is a shell script that runs all tests:

    $ ./runtests

See `./runtests --help` for more options.

I'm not using a coverage tool because I don't know how to use any C coverage
tools, and there are much more important things to fix than bad coverage; see
[my huge TODO list](TODO.md).

Commit message:

use make for tests because it has an awesome -j option

README.md, after:

# Ö

Ö is a programming language with a weird-ish syntax.

    <Akuli>      i like how 'ding = (dang dong)' translates to 'ding = dang(dong)',
                 just move the ( to the right side of the function name
    <Zaab1t>     haha
    <Zaab1t>     syntax is odd yeah

## Hello World!

Install `make`, a C compiler and `git`. For example, if you're using a
Debian-based Linux distribution like Ubuntu or Mint, run this command:

    $ sudo apt install gcc make git

Then download and compile the interpreter.

    $ git clone https://github.com/akuli/odotdot
    $ cd odotdot
    $ make ö

You should get lots of output, but no errors.

Save this code to `hello.ö`...

```js
var msg = "Hellö Wörld!";
print msg;
```

...and run it:

    $ ./ö hello.ö
    Hellö Wörld!

See [the tutorial](docs/tutorial.md) for more. There's also
[an examples directory](examples/) and [more documentation](docs/).

## FAQ

### How do I type ö?

With the ö key. It's right next to the ä key.

### Why did you name the programming language Ö?

Ö is used quite often in Finnish, and people who aren't used to it think that
it looks like a face with mouth fully opened.

    <Zaab1t>       looks like someone scared
    <Zaab1t>       ö

See also David Beazley's [Meẗal](https://github.com/dabeaz/me-al).

### Why is the repository named odotdot instead of ö?

Because github.

## Tests

This stuff is for people who want to develop my Ö interpreter (it's awesome if
you do, please let me know!) or are just interested in how stuff works.

Some of the tests are written in C and some tests are written in Ö.
`tests.Makefile` is a Makefile that compiles and runs all tests, and you can
use it like this:

    $ make -f tests.Makefile

Compiling the interpreter with just `make` also runs the tests. Run `make ö` to
compile without testing.

If a test fails, you can run just that test like this:

    $ make -f tests.Makefile ötests/test_array.ö

You can also pass these options to `make`:
- `VALGRIND=valgrind` runs all tests using a valgrind executable named
  `valgrind`. The executable must be in `$PATH` or a full path.
- `-j2` runs the tests in parallel, at most 2 tests at a time. This speeds up
  testing a *lot*, especially if you use valgrind. You can put any number you
  want after `-j`; usually the number of processors your system has is good.

I'm not using a coverage tool because I don't know how to use any C coverage
tools, and there are much more important things to fix than bad coverage; see
[my huge TODO list](TODO.md).
