docs/builtins.md, before:

# Built-in Functions and Classes

Ö's [built-in scope] contains things like basic data structures and commonly
needed functions. They are listed here.


## Functions

### func

`func "name arg1 arg2 arg3" block;` defines a new function with arguments named
`arg1`, `arg2` and `arg3`.

The string argument of `func` is first split with the `split_by_whitespace`
string method; see [String's method documentation](#string). Everything except
the first part of the split result are argument names, and there may be 0 or
more of them. The resulting [Function object](#function) is then set to
`block`'s [definition scope] with the name from the string.

If the resulting function is called with the wrong number of arguments, an
error is thrown.

Unfortunately there's no way to return anything from a function defined in Ö
yet :( I'll fix this eventually.

### if

`if condition block;` runs the block if `condition` is [true].

If `condition` is [true], `block` will be ran in a new [subscope] of its
[definition scope]. An error is thrown if the `condition` is not [true] or
[false] or the block is not a [Block](#block) object.

I'm sorry, there's no way to do `else` yet :( If you need an else, do this:

```python
if something {
    ...
};
if (not something) {
    ...
};
```

### not

`(not x)` returns [false] if `x` is [true], or [true] if `x` is [false].

If `x` is not [true] or [false], `(not x)` throws an error.

### equals

``(x `equals` y)`` returns [true] if `x` and `y` should be considered equal,
and [false] otherwise.

Right now Ö has only these rules for comparing equality of objects:
- If `x` and `y` are [the same object](#same-object), they compare equal.
- If `x` and `y` are [Strings](#string), their contents are compared.
- If `x` and `y` are [Integers](#integer), their values are compared.
- If `x` and `y` are [Arrays](#array), they compare equal if they have the same
  number of elements and the elements of `x` and `y` compare equal. Order
  matters, so `[1 2]` is not equal to `[2 1]`.
- If `x` and `y` are [Mappings](#mapping), the keys and values are checked for
  equality similarly to arrays.
- Otherwise, `x` and `y` are considered not equal.

Bugs:
- There's no way to override the default `equals` behaviour in custom classes.
  However, it's not actually possible to define classes yet, so this isn't a
  big problem yet.
- There really should be a `==` operator. Even though infix notation isn't too
  bad, `(x == y)` would be more readable than ``(x `equals` y)``.
- Comparing mappings is broken; it returns [false] for different mappings with
  equal content.

### same_object

``(x `same_object` y)`` returns [true] if `x` and `y` point to the same object,
and [false] otherwise.

For example, this sets `x` and `y` to the same object...

```python
var x = [];
var y = x;
```

...so you get behaviour like this:
- `x` and `y` are both empty, so ``(x `equals` y)`` returns [true]; see
  [equals](#equals).
- ``(x `same_object` y)`` returns [true].
- If you do `x::push "hi";` and then `print (y::to_debug_string)`, you'll get
  `["hi"]`. The `x` and `y` variables point to the same [array](#array), so
  doing something with `x` or `y` does that something to the array, regardless
  of the variable used.

But this creates two different objects...

```python
var x = [];
var y = [];
```

...and things behave a bit differently:
- `x` and `y` are both empty, so ``(x `equals` y)`` still returns [true].
- This time, ``(x `same_object` y)`` returns [false]!
- Doing something to `x` doesn't do the same thing to `y`.

### while

`while { keep_going = condition; } block;` runs `block` repeatedly until
`keep_going` is set to [false].

`while` creates a new subscope of `block`'s [definition scope]. Then it runs
the first argument in it, and that should set `keep_going` to [true] or
[false]. If `keep_going` was set to [true], `block` is ran in the same
subscope. Then the first argument is ran in the scope again and the process is
repeated until the interpreter segfaults or `keep_going` is set to [false].

Bugs:
- There's no `break` or `continue` yet.
- `while` is implemented with recursion, so infinite loops don't work. The
  interpreter segfaults at the end of a long loop.
- `while` is slow.
- The `{ keep_going = condition; }` syntax sucks. I think it should be
  `{ condition }` instead.

Example:

```python
# print numbers from 0 to 9
var i = 0;
while { keep_going = (not (i `equals` 10)); } {
    print (i::to_string);
    i = (i::plus 1);   # yes, this sucks... no + operator yet
};
```

### foreach

`foreach varname array block;` runs `block` once for each element of `array`.

First a new subscope of `block`'s [definition scope] is created. Then, for each
element of the array, a local variable named with the `varname` string is set
to the element in the subscope, and `block` is ran in the subscope.

Bugs:
- This is implemented with [while](#while), so it has many of the same bugs: no
  `break` or `continue`, segfaults the interpreter with long lists and is slow.
- I think `foreach` should be a method of [Array](#array) objects, not a
  function.

Example:

```python
# print "a", "b" and "c"
foreach "character" ["a" "b" "c"] {
    print character;
};
```

### catch

``block1 `catch` block2;`` tries to run `block1`, and runs `block2` if `block1`
throws an error.

Both blocks are ran in new subscopes of their
[definition scopes][definition scope].

Bugs:
- There's no way to access the caught [error object](#error) yet.
- There's no nice way to throw errors yet. Most of my Ö code uses
  `throw "a descriptive message";`, which actually works because there's no
  `throw` function yet (but the error message is `no variable named 'throw'`.
  I'll hopefully implement more stuff soon so that you can do e.g.
  `throw (new ValueError "it's too small");`.

### assert

`assert x;` is equivalent to `if (not x) { throw "assertion failed"; };`.

### new

`(new SomeClass arg1 arg2 arg3)` creates a new instance of a class.

The arguments are passed to the `setup` method of the class; that is, the
number and meanings of the arguments depends on which class was passed to
`new`.

### get_class

`(get_class x)` returns the [class](#classes) of `x`.

Don't use this function for checking types. For example,
``((get_class []) `same_object` Object)`` returns [false], even though
[all values are Objects](#object). Use [is_instance_of](#is_instance_of)
instead.

### is_instance_of

``(x `is_instance_of` SomeClass)`` checks if `x` is an instance of the class.

For example, ``("hello" `is_instance_of` String)`` returns [true], and
``(123 `is_instance_of` Array)`` returns [false].


## Classes

Every object has a class in Ö, and the class defines the methods that the
object has. For example, the class of `[1 2 3]` is [Array](#array), and the
Array class defines a method named `push` so you can do `the_array::push 4;`.

In some languages, there are "primitives" that are not objects and cannot be
treated like objects. I think that's dumb, so everything you can e.g. assign to
a variable is an object in Ö.

Classes are also objects and their class is `Class`, but the `Class` class
doesn't have any attributes or methods yet so there's no more documentation
about it. The `Class` class isn't in the built-in namespace, but you can access
it like `var Class = (get_class String);` if you need it for something.

### Object

This is the baseclass of all other classes; that is, all other classes inherit
from this class and thus have the methods that this class has.

New objects can be created with [new](#new) like `(new Object)`, but that's not
very useful because `Object` is meant to be used mostly as a base class for
other things. However, ``(x `is_instance_of` Object)`` always returns [true]
regardless of the type of `x`, and that could be useful with e.g. something
that checks types with [is_instance_of](#is_instance_of).

Methods:
- `(object::to_string)` should return a string suitable for displaying to the
  user of your Ö program. `Object`'s `to_string` calls `to_debug_string`.
- `(object::to_debug_string)` should return a programmer-friendly string that
  describes the object. `Object`'s `to_string` returns a string like
  `<ClassName at 0xblablabla>` where `ClassName` is the name of the object's
  class and the `0xblablabla` part is different for each object.

See [String](#string) for an example of why two to-string methods are needed.

### String

New strings cannot be created with `(new String)`; use *string literals* like
`"hello"` instead. There are more details about string literals
[here][string literals].

Strings are immutable, so they cannot be changed after creating the string;
there is no [array](#array)-like `set` method even though there's a `get`
method. Create a new string instead of modifying existing strings.

Strings behave a lot like [arrays](#array) of strings of length 1. For example,
`(["h" "e" "l" "l" "o"]::get 3)` and `("hello"::get 3)` both return `"l"`.

Methods:
- `string::get` is like the array `::get` method.
- `string::slice` is like the array `::get` method, but it returns a string
  instead of an array of characters.
- `(string::split_by_whitespace)` splits the string into an array of non-empty
  substrings separated by any Unicode whitespace (e.g. spaces, tabs or
  newlines). For example, `("  hello world  test"::split_by_whitespace)`
  returns `["hello" "world" "test"]`.
- `(string::to_string)` returns the string itself. This overrides
  [Object](#object)'s `to_string`.
- `(string::to_debug_string)` returns the string with quotes around it, so
  `print ("hello"::to_debug_string);` prints `"hello"` including the quotes.
  This overrides [Object](#object)'s `to_debug_string`.

The `to_string` [array](#array) method calls `to_debug_string` methods of the
content, so `print (["hello" "world"]::to_string)` prints `["hello" "world"]`,
not `[hello world]`.

Missing features:
- There's no `get_length` method.
- There's no way to concatenate strings; `"hello" + "world"` doesn't work
  because there's no `+` operator yet.

### Integer

New integers can be created with integer literals like `123`, or with a
`(new Integer)` call like `(new Integer "123")`. The `new` call allows leading
zeros so that `(new Integer "-00000000012")` returns `-12`, but leading zeros
are not allowed in integer literals; see [this thing][integer literals] for
more details about integer literals.

Integers are immutable; see
[String](#string) for more details about what this means practically.

The smallest allowed value of an integer is
-(2<sup>63</sup>) = -9223372036854775808, and the biggest value is
2<sup>63</sup> - 1 = 9223372036854775807. I'm planning on implementing
`Integer` differently so that it won't have these restrictions.

Methods (`x` and `y` are Integers):
- `(x::plus y)` returns x+y. Yes, I know, Ö really needs a `+` operator...
- `(x::to_string)` converts the integer to a string without leading zeros.

Missing features:
- There's no support for other bases than 10. I think there's no need to add
  special syntax (`0xff` is useful in low-level languages like C, but confuses
  people in high-level languages), but syntax like `(new Integer "ff" 16)`
  would be useful for e.g. dealing with hexadecimal colors. Similarly,
  `(255::to_string 16)` could return `"ff"`.
- `::plus` is the only way to do arithmetic with integers right now. It really
  sucks!

### Array

Arrays represent ordered lists of elements.

New arrays cannot be created with `(new Array)`. Use `[` and `]` instead:

```python
var array = [1 2 3];
```

`[]` creates an empty array.

There are no size limits; you can add as many elements to an array as you want
(as long as the array fits in the computer's memory).

Methods:
- `(array::get_length)` returns the number of items in the array as an
  [Integer](#integer).
- `array::push item;` adds `item` to the end of the array.
- `(array::pop)` deletes and returns the last item from the end of the array.
- `(array::get i)` returns the `i`'th element from the array. `(array::get 0)`
  is the first element, `(array::get 1)` is the second and so on. An error is
  thrown if `i` is negative or not less than `(array::get_length)`.
- `array::set i value;` sets the `i`'th item of the array to `value`. See `get`
  for more information about the `i` index.
- `(array::slice i j)` returns a new array that contains the elements between
  `i` and `j`. Both `i` and `j` are interpreted so that `0` means the beginning
  of the array and `(thing::get_length)` means the end of the array. Too big or
  small indexes are "rounded" to the closest possible values.
- `(array::slice i)` returns `(array::slice i (array::get_length))`.
- `(array::to_string)` calls `to_debug_string` methods of the array elements
  and returns the debug strings in square brackets, joined with spaces. This
  overrides [Object](#object)'s `to_string` without overriding
  `to_debug_string`, so `(array::to_debug_string)` does the same thing as
  `(array::to_string)`.

### Mapping

Mapping objects *map* keys to values; that is, looking up the value
corresponding to a key is easy and fast.

Use `(new Mapping pair_array)` to create a new mapping where `pair_array` is an
array of `[key value]` arrays. For example:

```python
var ordering_words = (new Mapping [[1 "first"] [2 "second"] [3 "third"]]);
print (ordering_words::get 2);   # prints "second"
```

Use `(new Mapping [])` to create an empty mapping.

The values in the mapping can be any objects, but the keys can't. `Mapping` is
implemented as a [hash table], so the keys they need to be hashable.

Most objects are hashable in Ö, but [Arrays](#array) and Mappings are not. If
they were, the hash value would need to change as the content of the array or
mapping changes, but objects that change their hash values after creating the
object would break most things that use hash values, e.g. hash tables.

I'll probably create some kind of `ImmutableArray` some day. Immutable arrays
would be hashable.

Methods:
- `mapping::set key value;` adds a new key-value pair to the mapping or changes
  the value of a key that is already in the mapping.
- `(mapping::get key)` returns the value of a key or throws an error if the key
  is not found.
- `mapping::delete key;` deletes a key-value pair from the mapping. An error is
  thrown if the key is not found.
- `(mapping::get_and_delete key)` is like `::delete`, but it returns the value
  of the deleted key.

Missing features:
- There's no `mapping::get_size` method.
- There's no way to loop over all the items in the mapping.

### Block

**See Also:** [The Ö tutorial](tutorial.md) contains lots of examples of how
Blocks are used in Ö.

New Blocks can be created with `{ ... }` syntax or with
`(new Block definition_scope ast_statements)`. Here `definition_scope` should
be a [Scope object][scope], and `ast_statements` should be an [array](#array)
of [AstNode] objects. I'm not sure when the `new` call would be actually
useful, but it might be fun for something crazy like creating new
`AstNode` objects (not possible yet, see [this thing][AstNode]) and running
them.

Attributes:
- `block.ast_statements` is a list of
  [AstNode statement objects](syntax-spec.md#parsing-to-ast).
- `block.definition_scope` is
  [the scope that the block was defined in][definition scope] if the block was
  created with the `{ ... }` syntax, and the scope passed to `new Block`
  otherwise. For example, `{}.definition_scope` is a handy way to access the
  scope that the code is running in.

Methods:
- `block::run scope;` runs the AST statements in the scope passed to this
  function. This method does nothing with `definition_scope`.

### Scopes

**See Also:** The Ö tutorial has [a section just about
scopes](tutorial.md#scopes), and it explains `parent_scope` and the built-in
scope in more detail.

New scopes can be created with `(new Scope parent_scope)`. The `local_vars`
mapping will be initialized to an empty mapping. Use `{}.definition_scope` to
access the scope that your code is currently running in (see [Block](#block)
above).

Attributes:
- `scope.local_vars` is a [Mapping](#mapping) of local variables in the scope
  with variable name strings as keys. `{ var x = 123; }::run scope;` is
  equivalent to `scope.local_vars::set "x" 123;`.
- `scope.parent_scope` is the scope that non-local variables are looked up from
  (see below), or [null](#null) if `scope` is the built-in scope.

For example, you can access the built-in scope like this:

```python
var builtin_scope = {}.definition_scope;
while { keep_going = (not (builtin_scope.definition_scope `same_object` null)); } {
    builtin_scope = builtin_scope.parent_scope;
};
# now (builtin_scope.local_vars::get "while") works
```

Methods:
- `scope::set_var varname value;` sets the value of an existing variable in the
  scope, or if it's not found, in the parent scope or its parent scope and so
  on. `{ x = 123; }::run scope;` without `var` in front of `x` is equivalent to
  `scope::set_var "x" 123;`.
- `(scope::get_var varname)` looks up a variable similarly to `set_var`, but
  returns it instead of changing its value. `{ print x; }::run scope;` is
  equivalent to `print (scope::get_var "x");`

### Function

The `Function` class is not in the built-in namespace, but you can access it
like `var Function = (get_class print)` if you need to. New functions cannot be
created with `(new Function)`; use [func](#func) instead.

Methods:
- `(function::partial arg1 arg2 arg3)` returns a new function that calls the
  original `function` with `arg1 arg2 arg3` and any arguments passed to the new
  function as arguments. So, `var g = (f::partial a b); g x y;` runs
  `f a b x y;`.

Missing features:
- There's no `.name` attribute or a customized `::to_debug_string` method, so
  debugging is hell.


## Other objects in the built-in namespace

These objects are not functions or classes.

### null

Like e.g. `none` or `nil` in many other programming languages.

Currently this is the string `"null"`. It sucks and I'll hopefully fix it
later.

### true, false

These are currently defined as the strings `"true"` and `"false"`. It sucks,
see `null` above.


[true]: #true-false
[false]: #true-false
[scope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[subscope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[built-in scope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[definition scope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[AstNode]: syntax-spec.md#parsing-to-ast
[string literals]: syntax-spec.md#tokenizing
[integer literals]: syntax-spec.md#tokenizing
[hash table]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_table

Commit message:

big diff... get rid of array_func shit for real

docs/builtins.md, after:

# Built-in Functions and Classes

Ö's [built-in scope] contains things like basic data structures and commonly
needed functions. They are listed here.


## Functions

### func

`func "name arg1 arg2 arg3" block;` defines a new function with arguments named
`arg1`, `arg2` and `arg3`.

The string argument of `func` is first split with the `split_by_whitespace`
string method; see [String's method documentation](#string). Everything except
the first part of the split result are argument names, and there may be 0 or
more of them. The resulting [Function object](#function) is then set to
`block`'s [definition scope] with the name from the string.

When called, the function creates a new subscope of `block`'s
[definition scope], and inserts the values of the arguments there as local
variables. A `return` variable is also added with an initial value of `null`;
its value is returned when the function exits. Note that `return` is just a
variable, so `return = 123;` doesn't exit the function immediately like
returning a value does in most other programming languages.

If the function is called with the wrong number of arguments, an error is
thrown.

Annoying and missing features:
- The `return = value;` syntax sucks. I think it really should be a function
  call like `return value;` instead, and that should exit the function right
  away.
- Functions don't have a `name` attribute or a nice `to_debug_string` yet, so
  debugging is painful.

### lambda

`(lambda "arg1 arg2 arg3" block)` returns a new function.

`lambda` is like [func](#func), but it returns a function instead of setting it
to `block`'s definition scope automagically. This also means that there's no
function name in the string argument.

### if

`if condition block;` runs the block if `condition` is [true].

If `condition` is [true], `block` will be ran in a new [subscope] of its
[definition scope]. An error is thrown if the `condition` is not [true] or
[false] or the block is not a [Block](#block) object.

I'm sorry, there's no way to do `else` yet :( If you need an else, do this:

```python
if something {
    ...
};
if (not something) {
    ...
};
```

### not

`(not x)` returns [false] if `x` is [true], or [true] if `x` is [false].

If `x` is not [true] or [false], `(not x)` throws an error.

### equals

``(x `equals` y)`` returns [true] if `x` and `y` should be considered equal,
and [false] otherwise.

Right now Ö has only these rules for comparing equality of objects:
- If `x` and `y` are [the same object](#same-object), they compare equal.
- If `x` and `y` are [Strings](#string), their contents are compared.
- If `x` and `y` are [Integers](#integer), their values are compared.
- If `x` and `y` are [Arrays](#array), they compare equal if they have the same
  number of elements and the elements of `x` and `y` compare equal. Order
  matters, so `[1 2]` is not equal to `[2 1]`.
- If `x` and `y` are [Mappings](#mapping), the keys and values are checked for
  equality similarly to arrays.
- Otherwise, `x` and `y` are considered not equal.

Bugs:
- There's no way to override the default `equals` behaviour in custom classes.
  However, it's not actually possible to define classes yet, so this isn't a
  big problem yet.
- There really should be a `==` operator. Even though infix notation isn't too
  bad, `(x == y)` would be more readable than ``(x `equals` y)``.
- Comparing mappings is broken; it returns [false] for different mappings with
  equal content.

### same_object

``(x `same_object` y)`` returns [true] if `x` and `y` point to the same object,
and [false] otherwise.

For example, this sets `x` and `y` to the same object...

```python
var x = [];
var y = x;
```

...so you get behaviour like this:
- `x` and `y` are both empty, so ``(x `equals` y)`` returns [true]; see
  [equals](#equals).
- ``(x `same_object` y)`` returns [true].
- If you do `x::push "hi";` and then `print (y::to_debug_string)`, you'll get
  `["hi"]`. The `x` and `y` variables point to the same [array](#array), so
  doing something with `x` or `y` does that something to the array, regardless
  of the variable used.

But this creates two different objects...

```python
var x = [];
var y = [];
```

...and things behave a bit differently:
- `x` and `y` are both empty, so ``(x `equals` y)`` still returns [true].
- This time, ``(x `same_object` y)`` returns [false]!
- Doing something to `x` doesn't do the same thing to `y`.

### while

`while { keep_going = condition; } block;` runs `block` repeatedly until
`keep_going` is set to [false].

`while` creates a new subscope of `block`'s [definition scope]. Then it runs
the first argument in it, and that should set `keep_going` to [true] or
[false]. If `keep_going` was set to [true], `block` is ran in the same
subscope. Then the first argument is ran in the scope again and the process is
repeated until the interpreter segfaults or `keep_going` is set to [false].

Bugs:
- There's no `break` or `continue` yet.
- `while` is implemented with recursion, so infinite loops don't work. The
  interpreter segfaults at the end of a long loop.
- `while` is slow.
- The `{ keep_going = condition; }` syntax sucks. I think it should be
  `{ condition }` instead.

Example:

```python
# print numbers from 0 to 9
var i = 0;
while { keep_going = (not (i `equals` 10)); } {
    print (i::to_string);
    i = (i::plus 1);   # yes, this sucks... no + operator yet
};
```

### foreach

`foreach varname array block;` runs `block` once for each element of `array`.

First a new subscope of `block`'s [definition scope] is created. Then, for each
element of the array, a local variable named with the `varname` string is set
to the element in the subscope, and `block` is ran in the subscope.

Bugs:
- This is implemented with [while](#while), so it has many of the same bugs: no
  `break` or `continue`, segfaults the interpreter with long lists and is slow.
- I think `foreach` should be a method of [Array](#array) objects, not a
  function.

Example:

```python
# print "a", "b" and "c"
foreach "character" ["a" "b" "c"] {
    print character;
};
```

### catch

``block1 `catch` block2;`` tries to run `block1`, and runs `block2` if `block1`
throws an error.

Both blocks are ran in new subscopes of their
[definition scopes][definition scope].

Bugs:
- There's no way to access the caught [error object](#error) yet.
- There's no nice way to throw errors yet. Most of my Ö code uses
  `throw "a descriptive message";`, which actually works because there's no
  `throw` function yet (but the error message is `no variable named 'throw'`.
  I'll hopefully implement more stuff soon so that you can do e.g.
  `throw (new ValueError "it's too small");`.

### assert

`assert x;` is equivalent to `if (not x) { throw "assertion failed"; };`.

### new

`(new SomeClass arg1 arg2 arg3)` creates a new instance of a class.

The arguments are passed to the `setup` method of the class; that is, the
number and meanings of the arguments depends on which class was passed to
`new`.

### get_class

`(get_class x)` returns the [class](#classes) of `x`.

Don't use this function for checking types. For example,
``((get_class []) `same_object` Object)`` returns [false], even though
[all values are Objects](#object). Use [is_instance_of](#is_instance_of)
instead.

### is_instance_of

``(x `is_instance_of` SomeClass)`` checks if `x` is an instance of the class.

For example, ``("hello" `is_instance_of` String)`` returns [true], and
``(123 `is_instance_of` Array)`` returns [false].


## Classes

Every object has a class in Ö, and the class defines the methods that the
object has. For example, the class of `[1 2 3]` is [Array](#array), and the
Array class defines a method named `push` so you can do `the_array::push 4;`.

In some languages, there are "primitives" that are not objects and cannot be
treated like objects. I think that's dumb, so everything you can e.g. assign to
a variable is an object in Ö.

Classes are also objects and their class is `Class`, but the `Class` class
doesn't have any attributes or methods yet so there's no more documentation
about it. The `Class` class isn't in the built-in namespace, but you can access
it like `var Class = (get_class String);` if you need it for something.

### Object

This is the baseclass of all other classes; that is, all other classes inherit
from this class and thus have the methods that this class has.

New objects can be created with [new](#new) like `(new Object)`, but that's not
very useful because `Object` is meant to be used mostly as a base class for
other things. However, ``(x `is_instance_of` Object)`` always returns [true]
regardless of the type of `x`, and that could be useful with e.g. something
that checks types with [is_instance_of](#is_instance_of).

Methods:
- `(object::to_string)` should return a string suitable for displaying to the
  user of your Ö program. `Object`'s `to_string` calls `to_debug_string`.
- `(object::to_debug_string)` should return a programmer-friendly string that
  describes the object. `Object`'s `to_string` returns a string like
  `<ClassName at 0xblablabla>` where `ClassName` is the name of the object's
  class and the `0xblablabla` part is different for each object.

See [String](#string) for an example of why two to-string methods are needed.

### String

New strings cannot be created with `(new String)`; use *string literals* like
`"hello"` instead. There are more details about string literals
[here][string literals].

Strings are immutable, so they cannot be changed after creating the string;
there is no [array](#array)-like `set` method even though there's a `get`
method. Create a new string instead of modifying existing strings.

Strings behave a lot like [arrays](#array) of strings of length 1. For example,
`(["h" "e" "l" "l" "o"]::get 3)` and `("hello"::get 3)` both return `"l"`.

Methods:
- `string::get` is like the array `::get` method.
- `string::slice` is like the array `::get` method, but it returns a string
  instead of an array of characters.
- `(string1::concat string2)` returns the strings added together. For example,
  `("hello"::concat "world")` returns `"helloworld"`.
- `(string::split_by_whitespace)` splits the string into an array of non-empty
  substrings separated by any Unicode whitespace (e.g. spaces, tabs or
  newlines). For example, `("  hello world  test"::split_by_whitespace)`
  returns `["hello" "world" "test"]`.
- `(string::to_string)` returns the string itself. This overrides
  [Object](#object)'s `to_string`.
- `(string::to_debug_string)` returns the string with quotes around it, so
  `print ("hello"::to_debug_string);` prints `"hello"` including the quotes.
  This overrides [Object](#object)'s `to_debug_string`.

The `to_string` [array](#array) method calls `to_debug_string` methods of the
content, so `print (["hello" "world"]::to_string)` prints `["hello" "world"]`,
not `[hello world]`.

Missing features:
- There's no `get_length` method.
- There's no way to concatenate strings; `"hello" + "world"` doesn't work
  because there's no `+` operator yet.

### Integer

New integers can be created with integer literals like `123`, or with a
`(new Integer)` call like `(new Integer "123")`. The `new` call allows leading
zeros so that `(new Integer "-00000000012")` returns `-12`, but leading zeros
are not allowed in integer literals; see [this thing][integer literals] for
more details about integer literals.

Integers are immutable; see
[String](#string) for more details about what this means practically.

The smallest allowed value of an integer is
-(2<sup>63</sup>) = -9223372036854775808, and the biggest value is
2<sup>63</sup> - 1 = 9223372036854775807. I'm planning on implementing
`Integer` differently so that it won't have these restrictions.

Methods (`x` and `y` are Integers):
- `(x::plus y)` returns x+y. Yes, I know, Ö really needs a `+` operator...
- `(x::to_string)` converts the integer to a string without leading zeros.

Missing features:
- There's no support for other bases than 10. I think there's no need to add
  special syntax (`0xff` is useful in low-level languages like C, but confuses
  people in high-level languages), but syntax like `(new Integer "ff" 16)`
  would be useful for e.g. dealing with hexadecimal colors. Similarly,
  `(255::to_string 16)` could return `"ff"`.
- `::plus` is the only way to do arithmetic with integers right now. It really
  sucks!

### Array

Arrays represent ordered lists of elements.

New arrays cannot be created with `(new Array)`. Use `[` and `]` instead:

```python
var array = [1 2 3];
```

`[]` creates an empty array.

There are no size limits; you can add as many elements to an array as you want
(as long as the array fits in the computer's memory).

Methods:
- `(array::get_length)` returns the number of items in the array as an
  [Integer](#integer).
- `array::push item;` adds `item` to the end of the array.
- `(array::pop)` deletes and returns the last item from the end of the array.
- `(array::get i)` returns the `i`'th element from the array. `(array::get 0)`
  is the first element, `(array::get 1)` is the second and so on. An error is
  thrown if `i` is negative or not less than `(array::get_length)`.
- `array::set i value;` sets the `i`'th item of the array to `value`. See `get`
  for more information about the `i` index.
- `(array::slice i j)` returns a new array that contains the elements between
  `i` and `j`. Both `i` and `j` are interpreted so that `0` means the beginning
  of the array and `(thing::get_length)` means the end of the array. Too big or
  small indexes are "rounded" to the closest possible values.
- `(array::slice i)` returns `(array::slice i (array::get_length))`.
- `(array::to_string)` calls `to_debug_string` methods of the array elements
  and returns the debug strings in square brackets, joined with spaces. This
  overrides [Object](#object)'s `to_string` without overriding
  `to_debug_string`, so `(array::to_debug_string)` does the same thing as
  `(array::to_string)`.

### Mapping

Mapping objects *map* keys to values; that is, looking up the value
corresponding to a key is easy and fast.

Use `(new Mapping pair_array)` to create a new mapping where `pair_array` is an
array of `[key value]` arrays. For example:

```python
var ordering_words = (new Mapping [[1 "first"] [2 "second"] [3 "third"]]);
print (ordering_words::get 2);   # prints "second"
```

Use `(new Mapping [])` to create an empty mapping.

The values in the mapping can be any objects, but the keys can't. `Mapping` is
implemented as a [hash table], so the keys they need to be hashable.

Most objects are hashable in Ö, but [Arrays](#array) and Mappings are not. If
they were, the hash value would need to change as the content of the array or
mapping changes, but objects that change their hash values after creating the
object would break most things that use hash values, e.g. hash tables.

I'll probably create some kind of `ImmutableArray` some day. Immutable arrays
would be hashable.

Methods:
- `mapping::set key value;` adds a new key-value pair to the mapping or changes
  the value of a key that is already in the mapping.
- `(mapping::get key)` returns the value of a key or throws an error if the key
  is not found.
- `mapping::delete key;` deletes a key-value pair from the mapping. An error is
  thrown if the key is not found.
- `(mapping::get_and_delete key)` is like `::delete`, but it returns the value
  of the deleted key.

Missing features:
- There's no `mapping::get_size` method.
- There's no way to loop over all the items in the mapping.

### Block

**See Also:** [The Ö tutorial](tutorial.md) contains lots of examples of how
Blocks are used in Ö.

New Blocks can be created with `{ ... }` syntax or with
`(new Block definition_scope ast_statements)`. Here `definition_scope` should
be a [Scope object][scope], and `ast_statements` should be an [array](#array)
of [AstNode] objects. I'm not sure when the `new` call would be actually
useful, but it might be fun for something crazy like creating new
`AstNode` objects (not possible yet, see [this thing][AstNode]) and running
them.

Attributes:
- `block.ast_statements` is a list of
  [AstNode statement objects](syntax-spec.md#parsing-to-ast).
- `block.definition_scope` is
  [the scope that the block was defined in][definition scope] if the block was
  created with the `{ ... }` syntax, and the scope passed to `new Block`
  otherwise. For example, `{}.definition_scope` is a handy way to access the
  scope that the code is running in.

Methods:
- `block::run scope;` runs the AST statements in the scope passed to this
  function. This method does nothing with `definition_scope`.

### Scopes

**See Also:** The Ö tutorial has [a section just about
scopes](tutorial.md#scopes), and it explains `parent_scope` and the built-in
scope in more detail.

New scopes can be created with `(new Scope parent_scope)`. The `local_vars`
mapping will be initialized to an empty mapping. Use `{}.definition_scope` to
access the scope that your code is currently running in (see [Block](#block)
above).

Attributes:
- `scope.local_vars` is a [Mapping](#mapping) of local variables in the scope
  with variable name strings as keys. `{ var x = 123; }::run scope;` is
  equivalent to `scope.local_vars::set "x" 123;`.
- `scope.parent_scope` is the scope that non-local variables are looked up from
  (see below), or [null](#null) if `scope` is the built-in scope.

For example, you can access the built-in scope like this:

```python
var builtin_scope = {}.definition_scope;
while { keep_going = (not (builtin_scope.definition_scope `same_object` null)); } {
    builtin_scope = builtin_scope.parent_scope;
};
# now (builtin_scope.local_vars::get "while") works
```

Methods:
- `scope::set_var varname value;` sets the value of an existing variable in the
  scope, or if it's not found, in the parent scope or its parent scope and so
  on. `{ x = 123; }::run scope;` without `var` in front of `x` is equivalent to
  `scope::set_var "x" 123;`.
- `(scope::get_var varname)` looks up a variable similarly to `set_var`, but
  returns it instead of changing its value. `{ print x; }::run scope;` is
  equivalent to `print (scope::get_var "x");`

### Function

The `Function` class is not in the built-in namespace, but you can access it
like `var Function = (get_class print)` if you need to. New functions cannot be
created with `(new Function)`; use [func](#func) instead.

Methods:
- `(function::partial arg1 arg2 arg3)` returns a new function that calls the
  original `function` with `arg1 arg2 arg3` and any arguments passed to the new
  function as arguments. So, `var g = (f::partial a b); g x y;` runs
  `f a b x y;`.

Missing features:
- There's no `.name` attribute or a customized `::to_debug_string` method, so
  debugging is hell.


## Other objects in the built-in namespace

These objects are not functions or classes.

### null

Like e.g. `none` or `nil` in many other programming languages.

Currently this is the string `"null"`. It sucks and I'll hopefully fix it
later.

### true, false

These are currently defined as the strings `"true"` and `"false"`. It sucks,
see `null` above.


[true]: #true-false
[false]: #true-false
[scope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[subscope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[built-in scope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[definition scope]: tutorial.md#scopes
[AstNode]: syntax-spec.md#parsing-to-ast
[string literals]: syntax-spec.md#tokenizing
[integer literals]: syntax-spec.md#tokenizing
[hash table]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_table
